from the formation of the solar system
until the day Earth's story from
Stardust a vibrant world is both
extremely long and very exciting and one
of the most fascinating things that ever
happened on its surface was the
appearance of life
the solar system is nearly 5 billion
years old it began when the Sun formed
from gas and dust that rotated toward a
central point eventually turning into a
celestial body which could generate
energy on its own a star
the remaining Stardust became the Stars
eight planets and as far as we know only
one of them has life on it the origins
of life on Earth are still not 100%
proven to this day two sources of doubt
are the thar paradox and the water
paradox the thar paradox says organic
elements combined with energy from the
Sun or geothermal heat are not enough to
form anything except asphalt something
else has to kick-start the creation of
the first organic molecules we're all
taught that life comes from water but
there are many other worlds where
there's even more water than on earth
yet no life besides this water is
actually dangerous for life in its early
stages this is the water paradox if we
could rewind a tape showing the
evolution of life right to its beginning
we would see the four major molecules
essential for its creation nucleic acids
that's RNA and DNA lipids proteins and
carbohydrates scientists believe that
the first life forms on the planet were
formed from strings of RNA molecules the
problem though is that the early planet
Earth was a water world with land making
up only 2 to 3% of its surface water
would have dissolved the first RNA bonds
that tried to form under the surface the
planet also lacked oxygen which is very
important for creating and sustaining
new bacteria 4 billion years ago another
planet had just enough oxygen and water
to make the necessary chemical reactions
possible Mars
at that time there was more oxygen on
Mars than on earth and our celestial
neighbors certainly had some water as
well although it didn't cover the whole
surface these conditions were perfect
for long strands of RNA to form in the
Martian deserts but the red planet could
not sustain early life-forms
scientists believe some organic
molecules from Mars made it to earth
through space after a meteor hit Mars
surface the quantity of water on earth
then became a great advantage for
developing the first forms of life from
the newly arrived Martian molecules
we're really lucky to live on earth it's
frightening to imagine what it would be
like to make even a quick visit to some
of the other planets take Venus for
example although it's relatively close
to our home planet the conditions on its
surface are unfriendly to say the least
it's actually not mercury the first in
line but Venus the second that's the
hottest planet in the solar system the
temperature on its surface can reach 860
degrees Fahrenheit that's hot enough to
melt let the planet's atmospheric
pressure meanwhile is 92 times that of
Earth's so what about mercury then
hugging the Sun so close yet with no
atmosphere to retain heat it experiences
huge temperature differences between its
day and night sides the side facing the
Sun can heat up to 800 degrees
Fahrenheit while the night side gets as
cold as minus 290 degrees
life on Earth would involve 58 days of
scorching heat followed by 58 days of
freezing called
the gas giant Jupiter was discovered
centuries ago huge storms cover its
entire surface one of them that iconic
great red spot has been raging for over
three hundred forty years and is much
larger than the whole earth
lightning on the gaseous planet is a
thousand times more powerful than what
we see here just about every
characteristic of a planet is determined
by how far it is from its star so if we
want to find places with similar
temperatures and humidity as Earth we
need to look for ones that are about as
far from their parent stars as the earth
is from the Sun the space where a planet
is at an optimal distance from a star is
called a habitable zone planets orbiting
there could possibly support liquid
water to date scientists have discovered
at least a dozen such planets in the
far-off regions of our galaxy let's look
at one of them
[Music]
kepler-186f is the most earth-like
planet ever discovered in the habitable
zone it's about 40 percent larger than
Earth and has a rocky surface the star
it orbits is a little different from our
Sun it's a red dwarf which in star terms
is small and cold because they're less
active than the Sun and other stars red
dwarfs can live for longer and be even
better candidates for sustaining
ecosystems on surrounding planets the
Gliese 581 star system is made up of
another set of planets orbiting a red
dwarf it's in the constellation of Libra
and is 20 light years away from our
solar system one of its planets Gliese
581d isn't far from the habitable zone
the planet's atmosphere creates a
greenhouse effect that raises its
surface temperatures to a level just
warm enough to sustain liquid water due
to its mass Gliese 581d
belongs to a group of worlds known as
super Earths as it's about seven times
heavier than our planet it's possible
that Gliese 581d is covered by a large
deep ocean and who knows what's hiding
in those depths there are billions upon
billions of stars similar to the Sun in
our vast and unexplored universe
most believe the cosmos began with the
Big Bang and is still expanding to this
day
others think the universe has no
boundaries and that it is always existed
and will continue to exist forever
whatever is true there's a huge number
of earth-like worlds out there and one
day we'll know for sure whether life
really does exist outside our solar
system